Update the design document (#34)
exasol/extension-manager: doc/design/design.md

@enduml
```

### Do we Need a Backend?

One option would be to implement everything in the JS client. However, we discarded that option, since it does not allow us to upgrade the installed adapters automatically. An automated job can't run in a browser.

### Extensions

The extension manager has an extension mechanism.

The extensions are integration projects maintained by Exasol. For now, it's not possible to install third party extensions, since it would be a security risk.

The extension manager itself has no dependencies to the Virtual Schema projects.
They are loaded at runtime.

```plantuml
@startuml
postgres as [PostgreSQL Virtual Schema\nExtension definition]
mysql as [MySQL Virtual Schema\nExtension definition]
extensionInterface as [Extension Manger interface]
extensionManager as [Extension Manager]

extensionInterface <-- extensionManager
extensionInterface <|-- postgres
extensionInterface <|-- mysql

extensionManager -> postgres: loaded at runtime
extensionManager -> mysql: loaded at runtime
@enduml
```

## Extension API

We have one extension definition per extension (integration project).

> All extension definitions implement the same public interface defined in `extension-manager-interface`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All extension definitions implement the same public interface defined in [`extension-manager-interface`](https://github.com/exasol/extension-manager-interface/):
```

#### Conditional Parameters

We need to have conditional parameters. An example use case for this is when a virtual schema for another database supports multiple connection protocols or libraries (e.g. ODBC and JDBC) that require different configuration options. Depending on the selected protocol we want to show or hide some parameters.

We decided to represent the condition as a JSON structure.

Example:

```js
extension = {
  // ...
  condition: {
    parameter: "connectorType",
    operator: Operators.EQ,
    value: "jdbc"
  }
  // ...
}
```

While this requires interpretation of the JSON structure, it allows us to transfer the parameter definition to the frontend as simple JSON in contrast to the alternative options considered.

##### Alternative Options

We considered the following options:

* Condition as JavaScript code in a string

  Example: `condition: "parameters.connectorType === \"jdbc\""`

* Condition as JavaScript callback

  Example:
   ```js
  extension = {
    condition: (parameterValues) => parameterValues.connectorType === "jdbc"
  }
  ```

> While both options don't need any interpretation logic they would require executing the JavaScript snippet in the frontend with `eval()` which could be interpreted as a security issue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While both options don't need any interpretation logic they would require executing the JavaScript snippet in the frontend with `eval()` which poses a security risk.
```
Don't downplay it. We know that it would be a bad idea. :-)

> The additional effort for interpreting the JSON structure occurs only once as we implement the interpretation in a separate library `extension-parameter-validator` written in TypeScript which is used by both the frontend and the backend.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We need to invest the additional effort for interpreting the JSON structure only once, as we implement the interpretation in a separate library `extension-parameter-validator` written in TypeScript which is used by both the frontend and the backend.
```

#### Validation

We implement input validation in two stages:

* In the client: Simple validation of each field
  * Required fields also with conditions
  * For text: regular expressions
  * For numbers: min, max
* In the backend:
  * Everything validated in the frontend (validate again to prevent attacks)

>   * Validation of the whole input: Here we can validate more complex constraints that for example involve multiple fields

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Validation of the whole input: Here we can validate more complex constraints (for example multiple interdependent fields)
```

}
@enduml
```

## Testing

The different components of the project are responsible for testing different things.

### extension-manager

The extension-manager project contains unit and integration tests that verify
* Loading and executing of JavaScript extensions
* Database interactions
* REST API interface
* Server-side parameter validation using `extension-parameter-validator`
* ...

Tests use dummy extensions, no real extensions.

### Extensions

Extensions are located in the repositories of the virtual schema implementations, e.g. `s3-document-files-virtual-schema`.

Tests for extensions are:
* Verify correct implementation of a specific version of the `extension-manager-interface` using the TypeScript compiler
* Unit tests written in TypeScript verify all execution paths of the extension
* Integration tests written in Java use a specific version of the `extension-manager` to verify that the extension
  * can be loaded
  * can install a virtual schema and check that it works
  * can update parameters of an existing virtual schema
  * can upgrade a virtual schema created with an older version
  * ...

## Restrictions

### Document Virtual Schemas Only Support a Single Version

> Document virtual schemas like `s3-document-files-virtual-schema` require a `SET SCRIPT` that must have a specific name. As this script references a specific virtual schema Jar, it's not possible to install multiple version of the same virtual schema in the same database `SCHEMA`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Document virtual schemas like `s3-document-files-virtual-schema` require a `SET SCRIPT` that must have a specific name. As this script references a specific virtual schema JAR archive, it is not possible to install multiple version of the same virtual schema in the same database `SCHEMA`.
```

> This means that in order to test a new version of a virtual schema we have to create a new `SCHEMA` with the required database objects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means that in order to test a new version of a virtual schema, we have to create a new `SCHEMA` with the required database objects.
```

## Possible Future Changes

The following features are out of scope for now, but the architecture of the extension manager must be prepared to support them.

### On Premise Support

The extension manager is also useful for customer using Exasol on premise.

### Automatic Installation of Required Files

> Currently the extension manager expects that requires files like virtual schema JARs or JDBC drivers are already available in BucketFS. A future version might download and install these files automatically or update them to the latest version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently the extension manager expects that required files like virtual schema JARs or JDBC drivers are already available in BucketFS. A future version might download and install these files automatically or update them to the latest version.
```

### Automatic Updates of Installed Extensions

When new versions of a virtual schema become available that potentially fix security issues, it would be helpful to automatically install the new version and update the virtual schemas during a maintenance window.

### Install Older Versions

> If an older version of the VS Jar is available on BucketFS we could allow the user to choose the version they want to use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If an older version of the VS JAR is available on BucketFS we could allow the user to choose the version they want to use.
```

StringParameter <|-- BaseParameter
SelectParameter <|-- BaseParameter
@enduml
```

#### Parameter Validation

The parameters are validated in the frontend and in the backend:
* validation in the frontend is required for a good user experience
* validation in the backend is required for security to avoid bypassing the UI.

Since we're lazy we decided to use the same code for both validations.

> For that reason we write the validation in TypeScript library `extension-parameter-validator` and use it in the frontend and in a JavaScript VM in the Go backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For that reason we write the validation in TypeScript library [`extension-parameter-validator`](https://github.com/exasol/extension-parameter-validator) and use it in the frontend and in a JavaScript VM in the Go backend.
```

#### Parameters, Versions and Updates

We decided to attach the parameter definitions to a specific version of the extension. That is required since parameters can change over time.

That implies that when doing updates, the extension-manager must check if parameter definitions changed. If there were breaking changes, the update can't be performed automatically.

The only option would be to add update scripts that define how to convert the parameters from one version to another. However, that is currently out of scope.

#### Conditional Parameters

> We need to have conditional parameters. A example for this is when a virtual schema for another database supports multiple connection protocols or libraries (e.g. ODBC and JDBC) that require different configuration options. Depending on the selected protocol we want to show or hide some parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to have conditional parameters. An example for this is when a virtual schema for another database supports multiple connection protocols or libraries (e.g. ODBC and JDBC) that require different configuration options. Depending on the selected protocol we want to show or hide some parameters.
```

Reviewer: :+1: nice example

To solve this, we considered the following options:

* Condition as JS code in a string

  Example: `condition: "parameters.source === \"s3\""`
* Condition as JS callback.

  Example:
   ```js
  extension = {
    condition: (parameterValues) => parameterValues.source === "s3"
  }
  ```
* Condition represented using structured JSON.

  Example:

>   ```js

Reviewer: use the example from above

```plantuml
@startuml
rectangle Account as "Exasol SaaS Account" {
  rectangle "Database (= 1 COS)" {
    object SYS.EXA_ALL_SCRIPTS {
    }

    object ADAPTERS.MY_ADAPTER {
    }

    storage BucketFS {
      file 1 as "postgres-vs.jar" {
      }
      file 2 as "postgres-jdbc.jar" {
      }
    }
  }
}

storage s3Bfs as "S3BucketFs (global)" {
  file 3 as "postgres-vs.jar" {
  }
  file 4 as "postgres-jdbc.jar" {
  }
}
s3Bfs -> BucketFS: mirrored
@enduml
```

```plantuml
@startuml
class Account as "Exasol SaaS Account"
class Database
class Installation as "Extension-Installation (UDFs, SCRIPTs, ...)"
class Instance as "Extension-Instance (Virtual schema)"
Account "1" o-- "*" Database
Database "1" o-- "*" Installation
Database "1" -- "1" BucketFs
Installation "1" o-- "*" Instance
@enduml
```

## Installation and Metadata

Extensions don't store their own metadata. Instead they read information about existing adapter scripts, connection definitions and virtual schemas from Exasol's metadata tables.

### Installation Process of a Document Virtual Schema

This is an example process how a document virtual schema is installed.

> * Check if the `extension-manager-interface` implemented by the extension is supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Check if the version of the `extension-manager-interface` implemented by the extension is supported.
```
